chapter_convolutional-neural-networks/index.md, before:

# Convolutional Neural Networks

In several of our previous examples, we have already come up
against image data, which consist of pixels arranged in a 2D grid.
Depending on whether we are looking at a black and white or color image,
we might have either one or multiple numerical values 
correspnding to each pixel location.
Until now, we have dealt with this rich structure 
in the least satisfying possible way.
We simply threw away this spatial structure 
by flattening each image into a 1D vector,
and fed it into a fully-connected network.
These networks are invariant to the order of their inputs.
We will get qualitatively identical results
out of a multilayer perceptron 
whether we preserve the original order of our features or 
if we permute the columns of our design matrix before learning the parameters.
Ideally, we would find a way to leverage our prior knowledge 
that nearby pixels are more related to each other.

In this chapter, we introduce convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
a powerful family of neural networks 
that were designed for precisely this purpose.
CNN-based network *architecures* 
now dominate the field of computer vision to such an extent 
that hardly anyone these days would develop 
a commerical application or enter a competition
related to image recognition, object detection, 
or semantic segmentation, 
without basing their approach on them.

Modern 'convnets', as they are often called owe their design
to inspirations from biology, group theory, 
and a healthy dose of experimental tinkering. 
In addition to their strong predictive performance,
convolutional neural networks tend to be computationally efficient,
both because they tend to require fewer parameters
than dense architectures 
and also because convolutions are easy to parralelize across GPU cores.
As a result, researchers have sought to apply convnets whenever possible,
and increasingly they have emerged as credible competitors
even on tasks with 1D sequence structure,
such as audio, text, and time series analysis,
where recurrent neural networks (introduced in the next chapter)
are conventionally used. 
Some clever adaptations of CNNs have also brought them to bear 
on graph-structured data and in recommender systems.

First, we will walk through the basic operationgs
that comprise the backbone of all modern convolutional networks.
These include the convolutional layers themselves,
nitty-gritty details including padding and stride,
the pooling layers used to aggregate information 
across adjacent spatial regions, 
the use of multiple *channels* (also called *filters*) at each layer,
and a careful discussion of the structure of modern architectures.
We will explore the design concepts of several representative deep
convolutional neural networks, each of which was briefly a dominant architecture at some point since 2012. 
These models include LeNet, the first convolutional network successfully deployed, long before the rise of deep learning;
AlexNet, the first large-scale network deployed to beat conventional computer vision methods on a large-scale vision challenge; 
the VGG network, which makes use of a number of repeating blocks of elements; the network in network (NiN) which convolves whole neural networks patch-wise over inputs; the GoogLeNet, which makes use of networks with parallel
concatenations (GoogLeNet); residual networks (ResNet) which are currently the most popular go-to architecture today, and densely connected networks (DenseNet), which are expensive to compute but have set some recent benchmarks. Many of these networks were at one point winners or runners-up in the famous ImageNet competition which served as a barometer of progress on supervised learning tasks in computer vision since 2010.


```eval_rst

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   why-conv
   conv-layer
   padding-and-strides
   channels
   pooling
   lenet
   alexnet
   vgg
   nin
   googlenet
   batch-norm
   resnet
   densenet
```

Commit message:

Cnn5 (#234)
* checking in some updates to pooling

* second set of updates to pooling

* edited lenet up to data acquisition

* finished first pass on editing the lenet section

* reorganizing the chapters so that convolutional is split from one oversized 90-page chapter into two manageable chapters. The first covers basics though LeNet and the second covers 'modern' convnets'

* fixed chapter naming

chapter_convolutional-neural-networks/index.md, after:

# Convolutional Neural Networks

In several of our previous examples, we have already come up
against image data, which consist of pixels arranged in a 2D grid.
Depending on whether we are looking at a black and white or color image,
we might have either one or multiple numerical values 
correspnding to each pixel location.
Until now, we have dealt with this rich structure 
in the least satisfying possible way.
We simply threw away this spatial structure 
by flattening each image into a 1D vector,
and fed it into a fully-connected network.
These networks are invariant to the order of their inputs.
We will get qualitatively identical results
out of a multilayer perceptron 
whether we preserve the original order of our features or 
if we permute the columns of our design matrix before learning the parameters.
Ideally, we would find a way to leverage our prior knowledge 
that nearby pixels are more related to each other.

In this chapter, we introduce convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
a powerful family of neural networks 
that were designed for precisely this purpose.
CNN-based network *architecures* 
now dominate the field of computer vision to such an extent 
that hardly anyone these days would develop 
a commerical application or enter a competition
related to image recognition, object detection, 
or semantic segmentation, 
without basing their approach on them.

Modern 'convnets', as they are often called owe their design
to inspirations from biology, group theory, 
and a healthy dose of experimental tinkering. 
In addition to their strong predictive performance,
convolutional neural networks tend to be computationally efficient,
both because they tend to require fewer parameters
than dense architectures 
and also because convolutions are easy to parralelize across GPU cores.
As a result, researchers have sought to apply convnets whenever possible,
and increasingly they have emerged as credible competitors
even on tasks with 1D sequence structure,
such as audio, text, and time series analysis,
where recurrent neural networks (introduced in the next chapter)
are conventionally used. 
Some clever adaptations of CNNs have also brought them to bear 
on graph-structured data and in recommender systems.

First, we will walk through the basic operationgs
that comprise the backbone of all modern convolutional networks.
These include the convolutional layers themselves,
nitty-gritty details including padding and stride,
the pooling layers used to aggregate information 
across adjacent spatial regions, 
the use of multiple *channels* (also called *filters*) at each layer,
and a careful discussion of the structure of modern architectures.
We will conclude the chapter with a full working example of LeNet, 
the first convolutional network successfully deployed, 
long before the rise of modern deep learning.
In the next chapter we'll dive into full implementations
of some of the recent popular neural networks 
whose designs are representative of most of the techniques
commonly used to design modern convolutional neural networks.


```eval_rst

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   why-conv
   conv-layer
   padding-and-strides
   channels
   pooling
   lenet
```
