chapter_computer-vision/kaggle-gluon-dog.md, before:

# Dog Breed Identification (ImageNet Dogs) on Kaggle


In this section, we will tackle the dog breed identification challenge in the Kaggle Competition. The competition’s web address is

> https://www.kaggle.com/c/dog-breed-identification

In this competition, we attempt to identify 120 different breeds of dogs. The data set used in this competition is actually a subset of the famous ImageNet data set. Different from the images in the CIFAR-10 data set used in the previous section, the images in the ImageNet data set are higher and wider and their dimensions are inconsistent.

Figure 11.17 shows the information on the competition's webpage. In order to submit the results, please register an account on the Kaggle website first.

![Dog breed identification competition website. The data set for the competition can be accessed by clicking the "Data" tab. (Source: www.](../img/kaggle-dog.png)

First, import the packages or modules required for the competition.

```{.python .input}
import sys
sys.path.insert(0, '..')

import collections
import d2l
import math
from mxnet import autograd, gluon, init, nd
from mxnet.gluon import data as gdata, loss as gloss, model_zoo, nn
import os
import shutil
import time
import zipfile
```

## Obtain and Organize the Data Sets

The competition data is divided into a training set and testing set. The training set contains 10,222 images and the testing set contains 10,357 images. The images in both sets are in JPEG format. These images contain three RGB channels (color) and they have different heights and widths. There are 120 breeds of dogs in the training set, including Labradors, Poodles, Dachshunds, Samoyeds, Huskies, Chihuahuas, and Yorkshire Terriers.

### Download the Data Set

After logging in to Kaggle, we can click on the "Data" tab on the dog breed identification competition webpage shown in Figure 11.17 and download the training data set "train.zip", the testing data set "test.zip", and the training data set labels "label.csv.zip". After downloading the files, place them in the three paths below:

* ../data/kaggle_dog/train.zip
* ../data/kaggle_dog/test.zip
* ../data/kaggle_dog/labels.csv.zip


To make it easier to get started, we provide a small-scale sample of the data set mentioned above, "train_valid_test_tiny.zip". If you are going to use the full data set for the Kaggle competition, you will also need to change the `demo` variable below to `False`.

```{.python .input  n=1}
# If you use the full data set downloaded for the Kaggle competition, change
# the variable below to False
demo = True
data_dir = '../data/kaggle_dog'
if demo:
    zipfiles = ['train_valid_test_tiny.zip']
else:
    zipfiles = ['train.zip', 'test.zip', 'labels.csv.zip']
for f in zipfiles:
    with zipfile.ZipFile(data_dir + '/' + f, 'r') as z:
        z.extractall(data_dir)
```

### Organize the Data Set

Next, we define the `reorg_train_valid` function to segment the validation set from the original Kaggle competition training set.  The parameter `valid_ratio` in this function is the ratio of the number of examples of each dog breed in the validation set to the number of examples of the breed with the least examples (66) in the original training set. After organizing the data, images of the same breed will be placed in the same folder so that we can read them later.

```{.python .input}
def reorg_train_valid(data_dir, train_dir, input_dir, valid_ratio, idx_label):
    # The number of examples of the least represented breed in the training
    # set
    min_n_train_per_label = (
        collections.Counter(idx_label.values()).most_common()[:-2:-1][0][1])
    # The number of examples of each breed in the validation set
    n_valid_per_label = math.floor(min_n_train_per_label * valid_ratio)
    label_count = {}
    for train_file in os.listdir(os.path.join(data_dir, train_dir)):
        idx = train_file.split('.')[0]
        label = idx_label[idx]
        d2l.mkdir_if_not_exist([data_dir, input_dir, 'train_valid', label])
        shutil.copy(os.path.join(data_dir, train_dir, train_file),
                    os.path.join(data_dir, input_dir, 'train_valid', label))
        if label not in label_count or label_count[label] < n_valid_per_label:
            d2l.mkdir_if_not_exist([data_dir, input_dir, 'valid', label])
            shutil.copy(os.path.join(data_dir, train_dir, train_file),
                        os.path.join(data_dir, input_dir, 'valid', label))
            label_count[label] = label_count.get(label, 0) + 1
        else:
            d2l.mkdir_if_not_exist([data_dir, input_dir, 'train', label])
            shutil.copy(os.path.join(data_dir, train_dir, train_file),
                        os.path.join(data_dir, input_dir, 'train', label))
```

The `reorg_dog_data` function below is used to read the training data labels, segment the validation set, and organize the training set.

```{.python .input  n=2}
def reorg_dog_data(data_dir, label_file, train_dir, test_dir, input_dir,
                   valid_ratio):
    # Read the training data labels
    with open(os.path.join(data_dir, label_file), 'r') as f:
        # Skip the file header line (column name)
        lines = f.readlines()[1:]
        tokens = [l.rstrip().split(',') for l in lines]
        idx_label = dict(((idx, label) for idx, label in tokens))
    reorg_train_valid(data_dir, train_dir, input_dir, valid_ratio, idx_label)
    # Organize the training set
    d2l.mkdir_if_not_exist([data_dir, input_dir, 'test', 'unknown'])
    for test_file in os.listdir(os.path.join(data_dir, test_dir)):
        shutil.copy(os.path.join(data_dir, test_dir, test_file),
                    os.path.join(data_dir, input_dir, 'test', 'unknown'))
```

Because we are using a small data set, we set the batch size to 1. During actual training and testing, we would use the entire Kaggle Competition data set and call the `reorg_dog_data` function to organize the data set. Likewise, we would need to set the `batch_size` to a larger integer, such as 128.

```{.python .input  n=3}
if demo:
    # Note: Here, we use a small data set and the batch size should be set
    # smaller. When using the complete data set for the Kaggle competition, we
    # can set the batch size to a larger integer
    input_dir, batch_size = 'train_valid_test_tiny', 1
else:
    label_file, train_dir, test_dir = 'labels.csv', 'train', 'test'
    input_dir, batch_size, valid_ratio = 'train_valid_test', 128, 0.1
    reorg_dog_data(data_dir, label_file, train_dir, test_dir, input_dir,
                   valid_ratio)
```

## Image Augmentation

The size of the images in this section are larger than the images in the previous section. Here are some more image augmentation operations that might be useful.

```{.python .input  n=4}
transform_train = gdata.vision.transforms.Compose([
    # Randomly crop the image to obtain an image with an area of 0.08 to 1 of
    # the original area and height to width ratio between 3/4 and 4/3. Then,
    # scale the image to create a new image with a height and width of 224
    # pixels each
    gdata.vision.transforms.RandomResizedCrop(224, scale=(0.08, 1.0),
                                              ratio=(3.0/4.0, 4.0/3.0)),
    gdata.vision.transforms.RandomFlipLeftRight(),
    # Randomly change the brightness, contrast, and saturation
    gdata.vision.transforms.RandomColorJitter(brightness=0.4, contrast=0.4,
                                              saturation=0.4),
    # Add random noise
    gdata.vision.transforms.RandomLighting(0.1),
    gdata.vision.transforms.ToTensor(),
    # Standardize each channel of the image
    gdata.vision.transforms.Normalize([0.485, 0.456, 0.406],
                                      [0.229, 0.224, 0.225])])
```

During testing, we only use definite image preprocessing operations.

```{.python .input}
transform_test = gdata.vision.transforms.Compose([
    gdata.vision.transforms.Resize(256),
    # Crop a square of 224 by 224 from the center of the image
    gdata.vision.transforms.CenterCrop(224),
    gdata.vision.transforms.ToTensor(),
    gdata.vision.transforms.Normalize([0.485, 0.456, 0.406],
                                      [0.229, 0.224, 0.225])])
```

## Read the Data Set

As in the previous section, we can create an `ImageFolderDataset` instance to read the data set containing the original image files.

```{.python .input  n=5}
train_ds = gdata.vision.ImageFolderDataset(
    os.path.join(data_dir, input_dir, 'train'), flag=1)
valid_ds = gdata.vision.ImageFolderDataset(
    os.path.join(data_dir, input_dir, 'valid'), flag=1)
train_valid_ds = gdata.vision.ImageFolderDataset(
    os.path.join(data_dir, input_dir, 'train_valid'), flag=1)
test_ds = gdata.vision.ImageFolderDataset(
    os.path.join(data_dir, input_dir, 'test'), flag=1)
```

Here, we create a `DataLoader` instance, just like in the previous section.

```{.python .input}
train_iter = gdata.DataLoader(train_ds.transform_first(transform_train),
                              batch_size, shuffle=True, last_batch='keep')
valid_iter = gdata.DataLoader(valid_ds.transform_first(transform_test),
                              batch_size, shuffle=True, last_batch='keep')
train_valid_iter = gdata.DataLoader(train_valid_ds.transform_first(
    transform_train), batch_size, shuffle=True, last_batch='keep')
test_iter = gdata.DataLoader(test_ds.transform_first(transform_test),
                             batch_size, shuffle=False, last_batch='keep')
```

## Define the Model

The data set for this competition is a subset of the ImageNet data set. Therefore, we can use the approach discussed in the ["Fine Tuning"](fine-tuning.md) section to select a model pre-trained on the entire ImageNet data set and use it to extract image features to be input in the custom small-scale output network. Gluon provides a wide range of pre-trained models. Here, we will use the pre-trained ResNet-34 model. Because the competition data set is a subset of the pre-training data set, we simply reuse the input of the pre-trained model's output layer, i.e. the extracted features. Then, we can replace the original output layer with a small custom output network that can be trained, such as two fully connected layers in a series. Different from the experiment in the ["Fine Tuning"](fine-tuning.md) section, here, we do not retrain the pre-trained model used for feature extraction. This reduces the training time and the memory required to store model parameter gradients.

You must note that, during image augmentation, we use the mean values and standard deviations of the three RGB channels for the entire ImageNet data set for normalization. This is consistent with the normalization of the pre-trained model.

```{.python .input  n=6}
def get_net(ctx):
    finetune_net = model_zoo.vision.resnet34_v2(pretrained=True)
    # Define a new output network
    finetune_net.output_new = nn.HybridSequential(prefix='')
    finetune_net.output_new.add(nn.Dense(256, activation='relu'))
    # There are 120 output categories
    finetune_net.output_new.add(nn.Dense(120))
    # Initialize the output network
    finetune_net.output_new.initialize(init.Xavier(), ctx=ctx)
    # Distribute the model parameters to the CPUs or GPUs used for computation
    finetune_net.collect_params().reset_ctx(ctx)
    return finetune_net
```

When calculating the loss, we first use the member variable `features` to obtain the input of the pre-trained model's output layer, i.e. the extracted feature. Then, we use this feature as the input for our small custom output network and compute the output.

```{.python .input}
loss = gloss.SoftmaxCrossEntropyLoss()

def evaluate_loss(data_iter, net, ctx):
    l_sum, n = 0.0, 0
    for X, y in data_iter:
        y = y.as_in_context(ctx)
        output_features = net.features(X.as_in_context(ctx))
        outputs = net.output_new(output_features)
        l_sum += loss(outputs, y).sum().asscalar()
        n += y.size
    return l_sum / n
```

## Define the Training Functions

We will select the model and tune hyper-parameters according to the model's performance on the validation set. The model training function `train` only trains the small custom output network.

```{.python .input  n=7}
def train(net, train_iter, valid_iter, num_epochs, lr, wd, ctx, lr_period,
          lr_decay):
    # Only train the small custom output network
    trainer = gluon.Trainer(net.output_new.collect_params(), 'sgd',
                            {'learning_rate': lr, 'momentum': 0.9, 'wd': wd})
    for epoch in range(num_epochs):
        train_l_sum, n, start = 0.0, 0, time.time()
        if epoch > 0 and epoch % lr_period == 0:
            trainer.set_learning_rate(trainer.learning_rate * lr_decay)
        for X, y in train_iter:
            y = y.as_in_context(ctx)
            output_features = net.features(X.as_in_context(ctx))
            with autograd.record():
                outputs = net.output_new(output_features)
                l = loss(outputs, y).sum()
            l.backward()
            trainer.step(batch_size)
            train_l_sum += l.asscalar()
            n += y.size
        time_s = "time %.2f sec" % (time.time() - start)
        if valid_iter is not None:
            valid_loss = evaluate_loss(valid_iter, net, ctx)
            epoch_s = ("epoch %d, train loss %f, valid loss %f, "
                       % (epoch + 1, train_l_sum / n, valid_loss))
        else:
            epoch_s = ("epoch %d, train loss %f, "
                       % (epoch + 1, train_l_sum / n))
        print(epoch_s + time_s + ', lr ' + str(trainer.learning_rate))
```

## Train and Validate the Model

Now, we can train and validate the model. The following hyper-parameters can be tuned. For example, we can increase the number of epochs. Because `lr_period` and `lr_decay` are set to 10 and 0.1 respectively, the learning rate of the optimization algorithm will be multiplied by 0.1 after every 10 epochs.

```{.python .input  n=9}
ctx, num_epochs, lr, wd = d2l.try_gpu(), 1, 0.01, 1e-4
lr_period, lr_decay, net = 10, 0.1, get_net(ctx)
net.hybridize()
train(net, train_iter, valid_iter, num_epochs, lr, wd, ctx, lr_period,
      lr_decay)
```

## Classify the Testing Set and Submit Results on Kaggle

After obtaining a satisfactory model design and hyper-parameters, we use all training data sets (including validation sets) to retrain the model and then classify the testing set. Note that predictions are made by the output network we just trained.

```{.python .input  n=8}
net = get_net(ctx)
net.hybridize()
train(net, train_valid_iter, None, num_epochs, lr, wd, ctx, lr_period,
      lr_decay)

preds = []
for data, label in test_iter:
    output_features = net.features(data.as_in_context(ctx))
    output = nd.softmax(net.output_new(output_features))
    preds.extend(output.asnumpy())
ids = sorted(os.listdir(os.path.join(data_dir, input_dir, 'test/unknown')))
with open('submission.csv', 'w') as f:
    f.write('id,' + ','.join(train_valid_ds.synsets) + '\n')
    for i, output in zip(ids, preds):
        f.write(i.split('.')[0] + ',' + ','.join(
            [str(num) for num in output]) + '\n')
```

After executing the above code, we will generate a "submission.csv" file. The format of this file is consistent with the Kaggle competition requirements. The method for submitting results is similar to method in the ["Get Started with Kaggle Competition: Predicting House Prices"](../chapter_deep-learning-basics/kaggle-house-price.md) section.


## Summary

* We can use a model pre-trained on the ImageNet data set to extract features and only train a small custom output network. This will allow us to classify a subset of the ImageNet data set with lower computing and storage overhead.


## Exercises

* When using the entire Kaggle data set, what kind of results do you get when you increase the `batch_size` (batch size) and `num_epochs` (number of epochs)?
* Do you get better results if you use a deeper pre-trained model?
* Scan the QR code to access the relevant discussions and exchange ideas about the methods used and the results obtained with the community. Can you come up with any better techniques?

## Reference

[1] Kaggle ImageNet Dog Breed Identification website. https://www.kaggle.com/c/dog-breed-identification

## Scan the QR Code to [Discuss](https://discuss.mxnet.io/t/2451)

![](../img/qr_kaggle-gluon-dog.svg)

Commit message:

D2lbook (#265)
* some

* rename to zreferences.md

* fix reference

* update intro

* update intro

* more

* more

* more

* chapter 4

* chapter 4

* chapter 5

* chapter 6

* chapter 7

* chapter 8

* chapter 9

* chapter 10

* chapter 11

* chapter 12

* chapter 13

* chapter 14

* update

* rm build/

* remove submodule

* fix latex error

* more edits

* update book organizations

* fix mlp chap label

* fix references

* move graffle

* move frontpage

* a simplified ci

chapter_computer-vision/kaggle-gluon-dog.md, after:

# Dog Breed Identification (ImageNet Dogs) on Kaggle


In this section, we will tackle the dog breed identification challenge in the Kaggle Competition. The competition’s web address is

> https://www.kaggle.com/c/dog-breed-identification

In this competition, we attempt to identify 120 different breeds of dogs. The data set used in this competition is actually a subset of the famous ImageNet data set. Different from the images in the CIFAR-10 data set used in the previous section, the images in the ImageNet data set are higher and wider and their dimensions are inconsistent.

Figure 11.17 shows the information on the competition's webpage. In order to submit the results, please register an account on the Kaggle website first.

![Dog breed identification competition website. The data set for the competition can be accessed by clicking the "Data" tab.](../img/kaggle-dog.png)
:width:`600px`

First, import the packages or modules required for the competition.

```{.python .input}
import sys
sys.path.insert(0, '..')

import collections
import d2l
import math
from mxnet import autograd, gluon, init, nd
from mxnet.gluon import data as gdata, loss as gloss, model_zoo, nn
import os
import shutil
import time
import zipfile
```

## Obtain and Organize the Data Sets

The competition data is divided into a training set and testing set. The training set contains 10,222 images and the testing set contains 10,357 images. The images in both sets are in JPEG format. These images contain three RGB channels (color) and they have different heights and widths. There are 120 breeds of dogs in the training set, including Labradors, Poodles, Dachshunds, Samoyeds, Huskies, Chihuahuas, and Yorkshire Terriers.

### Download the Data Set

After logging in to Kaggle, we can click on the "Data" tab on the dog breed identification competition webpage shown in Figure 11.17 and download the training data set "train.zip", the testing data set "test.zip", and the training data set labels "label.csv.zip". After downloading the files, place them in the three paths below:

* ../data/kaggle_dog/train.zip
* ../data/kaggle_dog/test.zip
* ../data/kaggle_dog/labels.csv.zip


To make it easier to get started, we provide a small-scale sample of the data set mentioned above, "train_valid_test_tiny.zip". If you are going to use the full data set for the Kaggle competition, you will also need to change the `demo` variable below to `False`.

```{.python .input  n=1}
# If you use the full data set downloaded for the Kaggle competition, change
# the variable below to False
demo = True
data_dir = '../data/kaggle_dog'
if demo:
    zipfiles = ['train_valid_test_tiny.zip']
else:
    zipfiles = ['train.zip', 'test.zip', 'labels.csv.zip']
for f in zipfiles:
    with zipfile.ZipFile(data_dir + '/' + f, 'r') as z:
        z.extractall(data_dir)
```

### Organize the Data Set

Next, we define the `reorg_train_valid` function to segment the validation set from the original Kaggle competition training set.  The parameter `valid_ratio` in this function is the ratio of the number of examples of each dog breed in the validation set to the number of examples of the breed with the least examples (66) in the original training set. After organizing the data, images of the same breed will be placed in the same folder so that we can read them later.

```{.python .input}
def reorg_train_valid(data_dir, train_dir, input_dir, valid_ratio, idx_label):
    # The number of examples of the least represented breed in the training
    # set
    min_n_train_per_label = (
        collections.Counter(idx_label.values()).most_common()[:-2:-1][0][1])
    # The number of examples of each breed in the validation set
    n_valid_per_label = math.floor(min_n_train_per_label * valid_ratio)
    label_count = {}
    for train_file in os.listdir(os.path.join(data_dir, train_dir)):
        idx = train_file.split('.')[0]
        label = idx_label[idx]
        d2l.mkdir_if_not_exist([data_dir, input_dir, 'train_valid', label])
        shutil.copy(os.path.join(data_dir, train_dir, train_file),
                    os.path.join(data_dir, input_dir, 'train_valid', label))
        if label not in label_count or label_count[label] < n_valid_per_label:
            d2l.mkdir_if_not_exist([data_dir, input_dir, 'valid', label])
            shutil.copy(os.path.join(data_dir, train_dir, train_file),
                        os.path.join(data_dir, input_dir, 'valid', label))
            label_count[label] = label_count.get(label, 0) + 1
        else:
            d2l.mkdir_if_not_exist([data_dir, input_dir, 'train', label])
            shutil.copy(os.path.join(data_dir, train_dir, train_file),
                        os.path.join(data_dir, input_dir, 'train', label))
```

The `reorg_dog_data` function below is used to read the training data labels, segment the validation set, and organize the training set.

```{.python .input  n=2}
def reorg_dog_data(data_dir, label_file, train_dir, test_dir, input_dir,
                   valid_ratio):
    # Read the training data labels
    with open(os.path.join(data_dir, label_file), 'r') as f:
        # Skip the file header line (column name)
        lines = f.readlines()[1:]
        tokens = [l.rstrip().split(',') for l in lines]
        idx_label = dict(((idx, label) for idx, label in tokens))
    reorg_train_valid(data_dir, train_dir, input_dir, valid_ratio, idx_label)
    # Organize the training set
    d2l.mkdir_if_not_exist([data_dir, input_dir, 'test', 'unknown'])
    for test_file in os.listdir(os.path.join(data_dir, test_dir)):
        shutil.copy(os.path.join(data_dir, test_dir, test_file),
                    os.path.join(data_dir, input_dir, 'test', 'unknown'))
```

Because we are using a small data set, we set the batch size to 1. During actual training and testing, we would use the entire Kaggle Competition data set and call the `reorg_dog_data` function to organize the data set. Likewise, we would need to set the `batch_size` to a larger integer, such as 128.

```{.python .input  n=3}
if demo:
    # Note: Here, we use a small data set and the batch size should be set
    # smaller. When using the complete data set for the Kaggle competition, we
    # can set the batch size to a larger integer
    input_dir, batch_size = 'train_valid_test_tiny', 1
else:
    label_file, train_dir, test_dir = 'labels.csv', 'train', 'test'
    input_dir, batch_size, valid_ratio = 'train_valid_test', 128, 0.1
    reorg_dog_data(data_dir, label_file, train_dir, test_dir, input_dir,
                   valid_ratio)
```

## Image Augmentation

The size of the images in this section are larger than the images in the previous section. Here are some more image augmentation operations that might be useful.

```{.python .input  n=4}
transform_train = gdata.vision.transforms.Compose([
    # Randomly crop the image to obtain an image with an area of 0.08 to 1 of
    # the original area and height to width ratio between 3/4 and 4/3. Then,
    # scale the image to create a new image with a height and width of 224
    # pixels each
    gdata.vision.transforms.RandomResizedCrop(224, scale=(0.08, 1.0),
                                              ratio=(3.0/4.0, 4.0/3.0)),
    gdata.vision.transforms.RandomFlipLeftRight(),
    # Randomly change the brightness, contrast, and saturation
    gdata.vision.transforms.RandomColorJitter(brightness=0.4, contrast=0.4,
                                              saturation=0.4),
    # Add random noise
    gdata.vision.transforms.RandomLighting(0.1),
    gdata.vision.transforms.ToTensor(),
    # Standardize each channel of the image
    gdata.vision.transforms.Normalize([0.485, 0.456, 0.406],
                                      [0.229, 0.224, 0.225])])
```

During testing, we only use definite image preprocessing operations.

```{.python .input}
transform_test = gdata.vision.transforms.Compose([
    gdata.vision.transforms.Resize(256),
    # Crop a square of 224 by 224 from the center of the image
    gdata.vision.transforms.CenterCrop(224),
    gdata.vision.transforms.ToTensor(),
    gdata.vision.transforms.Normalize([0.485, 0.456, 0.406],
                                      [0.229, 0.224, 0.225])])
```

## Read the Data Set

As in the previous section, we can create an `ImageFolderDataset` instance to read the data set containing the original image files.

```{.python .input  n=5}
train_ds = gdata.vision.ImageFolderDataset(
    os.path.join(data_dir, input_dir, 'train'), flag=1)
valid_ds = gdata.vision.ImageFolderDataset(
    os.path.join(data_dir, input_dir, 'valid'), flag=1)
train_valid_ds = gdata.vision.ImageFolderDataset(
    os.path.join(data_dir, input_dir, 'train_valid'), flag=1)
test_ds = gdata.vision.ImageFolderDataset(
    os.path.join(data_dir, input_dir, 'test'), flag=1)
```

Here, we create a `DataLoader` instance, just like in the previous section.

```{.python .input}
train_iter = gdata.DataLoader(train_ds.transform_first(transform_train),
                              batch_size, shuffle=True, last_batch='keep')
valid_iter = gdata.DataLoader(valid_ds.transform_first(transform_test),
                              batch_size, shuffle=True, last_batch='keep')
train_valid_iter = gdata.DataLoader(train_valid_ds.transform_first(
    transform_train), batch_size, shuffle=True, last_batch='keep')
test_iter = gdata.DataLoader(test_ds.transform_first(transform_test),
                             batch_size, shuffle=False, last_batch='keep')
```

## Define the Model

The data set for this competition is a subset of the ImageNet data
set. Therefore, we can use the approach discussed in
:numref:`chapter_fine_tuning`
to select a model pre-trained on the
entire ImageNet data set and use it to extract image features to be input in the
custom small-scale output network. Gluon provides a wide range of pre-trained
models. Here, we will use the pre-trained ResNet-34 model. Because the
competition data set is a subset of the pre-training data set, we simply reuse
the input of the pre-trained model's output layer, i.e. the extracted
features. Then, we can replace the original output layer with a small custom
output network that can be trained, such as two fully connected layers in a
series. Different from the experiment in
:numref:`chapter_fine_tuning`, here, we do not retrain the pre-trained model used for feature
extraction. This reduces the training time and the memory required to store
model parameter gradients.

You must note that, during image augmentation, we use the mean values and standard deviations of the three RGB channels for the entire ImageNet data set for normalization. This is consistent with the normalization of the pre-trained model.

```{.python .input  n=6}
def get_net(ctx):
    finetune_net = model_zoo.vision.resnet34_v2(pretrained=True)
    # Define a new output network
    finetune_net.output_new = nn.HybridSequential(prefix='')
    finetune_net.output_new.add(nn.Dense(256, activation='relu'))
    # There are 120 output categories
    finetune_net.output_new.add(nn.Dense(120))
    # Initialize the output network
    finetune_net.output_new.initialize(init.Xavier(), ctx=ctx)
    # Distribute the model parameters to the CPUs or GPUs used for computation
    finetune_net.collect_params().reset_ctx(ctx)
    return finetune_net
```

When calculating the loss, we first use the member variable `features` to obtain the input of the pre-trained model's output layer, i.e. the extracted feature. Then, we use this feature as the input for our small custom output network and compute the output.

```{.python .input}
loss = gloss.SoftmaxCrossEntropyLoss()

def evaluate_loss(data_iter, net, ctx):
    l_sum, n = 0.0, 0
    for X, y in data_iter:
        y = y.as_in_context(ctx)
        output_features = net.features(X.as_in_context(ctx))
        outputs = net.output_new(output_features)
        l_sum += loss(outputs, y).sum().asscalar()
        n += y.size
    return l_sum / n
```

## Define the Training Functions

We will select the model and tune hyper-parameters according to the model's performance on the validation set. The model training function `train` only trains the small custom output network.

```{.python .input  n=7}
def train(net, train_iter, valid_iter, num_epochs, lr, wd, ctx, lr_period,
          lr_decay):
    # Only train the small custom output network
    trainer = gluon.Trainer(net.output_new.collect_params(), 'sgd',
                            {'learning_rate': lr, 'momentum': 0.9, 'wd': wd})
    for epoch in range(num_epochs):
        train_l_sum, n, start = 0.0, 0, time.time()
        if epoch > 0 and epoch % lr_period == 0:
            trainer.set_learning_rate(trainer.learning_rate * lr_decay)
        for X, y in train_iter:
            y = y.as_in_context(ctx)
            output_features = net.features(X.as_in_context(ctx))
            with autograd.record():
                outputs = net.output_new(output_features)
                l = loss(outputs, y).sum()
            l.backward()
            trainer.step(batch_size)
            train_l_sum += l.asscalar()
            n += y.size
        time_s = "time %.2f sec" % (time.time() - start)
        if valid_iter is not None:
            valid_loss = evaluate_loss(valid_iter, net, ctx)
            epoch_s = ("epoch %d, train loss %f, valid loss %f, "
                       % (epoch + 1, train_l_sum / n, valid_loss))
        else:
            epoch_s = ("epoch %d, train loss %f, "
                       % (epoch + 1, train_l_sum / n))
        print(epoch_s + time_s + ', lr ' + str(trainer.learning_rate))
```

## Train and Validate the Model

Now, we can train and validate the model. The following hyper-parameters can be tuned. For example, we can increase the number of epochs. Because `lr_period` and `lr_decay` are set to 10 and 0.1 respectively, the learning rate of the optimization algorithm will be multiplied by 0.1 after every 10 epochs.

```{.python .input  n=9}
ctx, num_epochs, lr, wd = d2l.try_gpu(), 1, 0.01, 1e-4
lr_period, lr_decay, net = 10, 0.1, get_net(ctx)
net.hybridize()
train(net, train_iter, valid_iter, num_epochs, lr, wd, ctx, lr_period,
      lr_decay)
```

## Classify the Testing Set and Submit Results on Kaggle

After obtaining a satisfactory model design and hyper-parameters, we use all training data sets (including validation sets) to retrain the model and then classify the testing set. Note that predictions are made by the output network we just trained.

```{.python .input  n=8}
net = get_net(ctx)
net.hybridize()
train(net, train_valid_iter, None, num_epochs, lr, wd, ctx, lr_period,
      lr_decay)

preds = []
for data, label in test_iter:
    output_features = net.features(data.as_in_context(ctx))
    output = nd.softmax(net.output_new(output_features))
    preds.extend(output.asnumpy())
ids = sorted(os.listdir(os.path.join(data_dir, input_dir, 'test/unknown')))
with open('submission.csv', 'w') as f:
    f.write('id,' + ','.join(train_valid_ds.synsets) + '\n')
    for i, output in zip(ids, preds):
        f.write(i.split('.')[0] + ',' + ','.join(
            [str(num) for num in output]) + '\n')
```

After executing the above code, we will generate a "submission.csv" file. The
format of this file is consistent with the Kaggle competition requirements. The
method for submitting results is similar to method in
:numref:`chapter_kaggle_house`.


## Summary

* We can use a model pre-trained on the ImageNet data set to extract features and only train a small custom output network. This will allow us to classify a subset of the ImageNet data set with lower computing and storage overhead.


## Exercises

* When using the entire Kaggle data set, what kind of results do you get when you increase the `batch_size` (batch size) and `num_epochs` (number of epochs)?
* Do you get better results if you use a deeper pre-trained model?
* Scan the QR code to access the relevant discussions and exchange ideas about the methods used and the results obtained with the community. Can you come up with any better techniques?

## Reference

[1] Kaggle ImageNet Dog Breed Identification website. https://www.kaggle.com/c/dog-breed-identification

## Scan the QR Code to [Discuss](https://discuss.mxnet.io/t/2451)

![](../img/qr_kaggle-gluon-dog.svg)
