chapter_computer-vision/object-detection-dataset.md, before:

# Object Detection Data Set (Pikachu)

There are no small data sets, like MNIST or Fashion-MNIST, in the object detection field. In order to quickly test models, we are going to assemble a small data set. First, we generate 1000 Pikachu images of different angles and sizes using an open source 3D Pikachu model. Then, we collect a series of background images and place a Pikachu image at a random position on each image. We use the im2rec tool provided by MXNet to convert the images to binary RecordIO format[1]. This format can reduce the storage overhead of the data set on the disk and improve the reading efficiency. If you want to learn more about how to read images, refer to the documentation for the GluonCV Toolkit[2].


## Download the Data Set

The Pikachu data set in RecordIO format can be downloaded directly from the Internet. The operation for downloading the data set is defined in the function `_download_pikachu`.

```{.python .input  n=1}
%matplotlib inline
import d2l
from mxnet import gluon, image
from mxnet.gluon import utils as gutils
import os

def _download_pikachu(data_dir):
    root_url = ('https://apache-mxnet.s3-accelerate.amazonaws.com/'
                'gluon/dataset/pikachu/')
    dataset = {'train.rec': 'e6bcb6ffba1ac04ff8a9b1115e650af56ee969c8',
               'train.idx': 'dcf7318b2602c06428b9988470c731621716c393',
               'val.rec': 'd6c33f799b4d058e82f2cb5bd9a976f69d72d520'}
    for k, v in dataset.items():
        gutils.download(root_url + k, os.path.join(data_dir, k), sha1_hash=v)
```

## Read the Data Set

We are going to read the object detection data set by creating the instance `ImageDetIter`. The "Det" in the name refers to Detection. We will read the training data set in random order. Since the format of the data set is RecordIO, we need the image index file `'train.idx'` to read random mini-batches. In addition, for each image of the training set, we will use random cropping and require the cropped image to cover at least 95% of each object. Since the cropping is random, this requirement is not always satisfied. We preset the maximum number of random cropping attempts to 200. If none of them meets the requirement, the image will not be cropped. To ensure the certainty of the output, we will not randomly crop the images in the test data set. We also do not need to read the test data set in random order.

```{.python .input  n=2}
# This function is saved in the d2l package for future use.
def load_data_pikachu(batch_size, edge_size=256):  # Edge_size: the width and height of the output image.
    data_dir = '../data/pikachu'
    _download_pikachu(data_dir)
    train_iter = image.ImageDetIter(
        path_imgrec=os.path.join(data_dir, 'train.rec'),
        path_imgidx=os.path.join(data_dir, 'train.idx'),
        batch_size=batch_size,
        data_shape=(3, edge_size, edge_size),  # The shape of the output image.
        shuffle=True,  # Read the data set in random order.
        rand_crop=1,  # The probability of random cropping is 1.
        min_object_covered=0.95, max_attempts=200)
    val_iter = image.ImageDetIter(
        path_imgrec=os.path.join(data_dir, 'val.rec'), batch_size=batch_size,
        data_shape=(3, edge_size, edge_size), shuffle=False)
    return train_iter, val_iter
```

Below, we read a mini-batch and print the shape of the image and label. The shape of the image is the same as in the previous experiment (batch size, number of channels, height, width). The shape of the label is (batch size, $m$, 5), where $m$ is equal to the maximum number of bounding boxes contained in a single image in the data set. Although computation for the mini-batch is very efficient, it requires each image to contain the same number of bounding boxes so that they can be placed in the same batch. Since each image may have a different number of bounding boxes, we can add illegal bounding boxes to images that have less than $m$ bounding boxes until each image contains $m$ bounding boxes. Thus, we can read a mini-batch of images each time. The label of each bounding box in the image is represented by an array of length 5 The first element in the array is the category of the object contained in the bounding box. When the value is -1, the bounding box is an illegal bounding box for filling purpose. The remaining four elements of the array represent the $x, y$ axis coordinates of the upper-left corner of the bounding box and the $x, y$ axis coordinates of the lower-right corner of the bounding box (the value range is between 0 and 1). The Pikachu data set here has only one bounding box per image, so $m=1$.

```{.python .input  n=3}
batch_size, edge_size = 32, 256
train_iter, _ = load_data_pikachu(batch_size, edge_size)
batch = train_iter.next()
batch.data[0].shape, batch.label[0].shape
```

## Graphic Data

We have ten images with bounding boxes on them. We can see that the angle, size, and position of Pikachu are different in each image. Of course, this is a simple man-made data set. In actual practice, the data is usually much more complicated.

```{.python .input  n=4}
imgs = (batch.data[0][0:10].transpose((0, 2, 3, 1))) / 255
axes = d2l.show_images(imgs, 2, 5).flatten()
for ax, label in zip(axes, batch.label[0][0:10]):
    d2l.show_bboxes(ax, [label[0][1:5] * edge_size], colors=['w'])
```

## Summary

* The Pikachu data set we synthesized can be used to test object detection models.
* The data reading for object detection is similar to that for image classification. However, after we introduce bounding boxes, the label shape and image augmentation (e.g., random cropping) are changed.


## Problems

* Referring to the MXNet documentation, what are the parameters for the constructors of the `image.ImageDetIter` and `image.CreateDetAugmenter` classes? What is their significance?

## References

[1] im2rec Tool. https://github.com/apache/incubator-mxnet/blob/master/tools/im2rec.py

[2] GluonCV Toolkit. https://gluon-cv.mxnet.io/

## Discuss on our Forum

<div id="discuss" topic_id="2452"></div>

Commit message:

rm d2l dep, sys.path.insert(), not exceed 80 chars per line, align code

chapter_computer-vision/object-detection-dataset.md, after:

# Object Detection Data Set (Pikachu)

There are no small data sets, like MNIST or Fashion-MNIST, in the object detection field. In order to quickly test models, we are going to assemble a small data set. First, we generate 1000 Pikachu images of different angles and sizes using an open source 3D Pikachu model. Then, we collect a series of background images and place a Pikachu image at a random position on each image. We use the im2rec tool provided by MXNet to convert the images to binary RecordIO format[1]. This format can reduce the storage overhead of the data set on the disk and improve the reading efficiency. If you want to learn more about how to read images, refer to the documentation for the GluonCV Toolkit[2].


## Download the Data Set

The Pikachu data set in RecordIO format can be downloaded directly from the Internet. The operation for downloading the data set is defined in the function `_download_pikachu`.

```{.python .input  n=1}
import sys
sys.path.insert(0, '..')

%matplotlib inline
import d2l
from mxnet import gluon, image
from mxnet.gluon import utils as gutils
import os

def _download_pikachu(data_dir):
    root_url = ('https://apache-mxnet.s3-accelerate.amazonaws.com/'
                'gluon/dataset/pikachu/')
    dataset = {'train.rec': 'e6bcb6ffba1ac04ff8a9b1115e650af56ee969c8',
               'train.idx': 'dcf7318b2602c06428b9988470c731621716c393',
               'val.rec': 'd6c33f799b4d058e82f2cb5bd9a976f69d72d520'}
    for k, v in dataset.items():
        gutils.download(root_url + k, os.path.join(data_dir, k), sha1_hash=v)
```

## Read the Data Set

We are going to read the object detection data set by creating the instance `ImageDetIter`. The "Det" in the name refers to Detection. We will read the training data set in random order. Since the format of the data set is RecordIO, we need the image index file `'train.idx'` to read random mini-batches. In addition, for each image of the training set, we will use random cropping and require the cropped image to cover at least 95% of each object. Since the cropping is random, this requirement is not always satisfied. We preset the maximum number of random cropping attempts to 200. If none of them meets the requirement, the image will not be cropped. To ensure the certainty of the output, we will not randomly crop the images in the test data set. We also do not need to read the test data set in random order.

```{.python .input  n=2}
# This function has been saved in the d2l package for future use
# Edge_size: the width and height of the output image
def load_data_pikachu(batch_size, edge_size=256):
    data_dir = '../data/pikachu'
    _download_pikachu(data_dir)
    train_iter = image.ImageDetIter(
        path_imgrec=os.path.join(data_dir, 'train.rec'),
        path_imgidx=os.path.join(data_dir, 'train.idx'),
        batch_size=batch_size,
        data_shape=(3, edge_size, edge_size),  # The shape of the output image
        shuffle=True,  # Read the data set in random order
        rand_crop=1,  # The probability of random cropping is 1
        min_object_covered=0.95, max_attempts=200)
    val_iter = image.ImageDetIter(
        path_imgrec=os.path.join(data_dir, 'val.rec'), batch_size=batch_size,
        data_shape=(3, edge_size, edge_size), shuffle=False)
    return train_iter, val_iter
```

Below, we read a mini-batch and print the shape of the image and label. The shape of the image is the same as in the previous experiment (batch size, number of channels, height, width). The shape of the label is (batch size, $m$, 5), where $m$ is equal to the maximum number of bounding boxes contained in a single image in the data set. Although computation for the mini-batch is very efficient, it requires each image to contain the same number of bounding boxes so that they can be placed in the same batch. Since each image may have a different number of bounding boxes, we can add illegal bounding boxes to images that have less than $m$ bounding boxes until each image contains $m$ bounding boxes. Thus, we can read a mini-batch of images each time. The label of each bounding box in the image is represented by an array of length 5 The first element in the array is the category of the object contained in the bounding box. When the value is -1, the bounding box is an illegal bounding box for filling purpose. The remaining four elements of the array represent the $x, y$ axis coordinates of the upper-left corner of the bounding box and the $x, y$ axis coordinates of the lower-right corner of the bounding box (the value range is between 0 and 1). The Pikachu data set here has only one bounding box per image, so $m=1$.

```{.python .input  n=3}
batch_size, edge_size = 32, 256
train_iter, _ = load_data_pikachu(batch_size, edge_size)
batch = train_iter.next()
batch.data[0].shape, batch.label[0].shape
```

## Graphic Data

We have ten images with bounding boxes on them. We can see that the angle, size, and position of Pikachu are different in each image. Of course, this is a simple man-made data set. In actual practice, the data is usually much more complicated.

```{.python .input  n=4}
imgs = (batch.data[0][0:10].transpose((0, 2, 3, 1))) / 255
axes = d2l.show_images(imgs, 2, 5).flatten()
for ax, label in zip(axes, batch.label[0][0:10]):
    d2l.show_bboxes(ax, [label[0][1:5] * edge_size], colors=['w'])
```

## Summary

* The Pikachu data set we synthesized can be used to test object detection models.
* The data reading for object detection is similar to that for image classification. However, after we introduce bounding boxes, the label shape and image augmentation (e.g., random cropping) are changed.


## Problems

* Referring to the MXNet documentation, what are the parameters for the constructors of the `image.ImageDetIter` and `image.CreateDetAugmenter` classes? What is their significance?

## References

[1] im2rec Tool. https://github.com/apache/incubator-mxnet/blob/master/tools/im2rec.py

[2] GluonCV Toolkit. https://gluon-cv.mxnet.io/

## Discuss on our Forum

<div id="discuss" topic_id="2452"></div>
