chapter_multilayer-perceptrons/mlp-gluon.md, before:

# Concise Implementation of Multilayer Perceptron
:label:`chapter_mlp_gluon`

Now that we learned how multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) work in theory, let's implement them. We begin, as always, by importing modules.

```{.python .input}
import sys
sys.path.insert(0, '..')

import d2l
from mxnet import gluon, init
from mxnet.gluon import loss as gloss, nn
```

## The Model

The only difference from our softmax regression implementation
is that we add two `Dense` (fully-connected) layers instead of one.
The first is our hidden layer, which has *256* hidden units
and uses the ReLU activation function.

```{.python .input  n=5}
net = nn.Sequential()
net.add(nn.Dense(256, activation='relu'))
net.add(nn.Dense(10))
net.initialize(init.Normal(sigma=0.01))
```

Note that as above we can invoke `net.add()` multiple times in succession,
but we can also invoke it a single time, passing in
multiple layers to be added the network.
Thus, we could have equivalently written
`net.add(nn.Dense(256, activation='relu'), nn.Dense(10))`.
Again, note that as always, Gluon automatically
infers the missing input dimensions to each layer.

Training the model follows the exact same steps as in our softmax regression implementation.

```{.python .input  n=6}
batch_size = 256
train_iter, test_iter = d2l.load_data_fashion_mnist(batch_size)

loss = gloss.SoftmaxCrossEntropyLoss()
trainer = gluon.Trainer(net.collect_params(), 'sgd', {'learning_rate': 0.5})
num_epochs = 10
d2l.train_ch3(net, train_iter, test_iter, loss, num_epochs, batch_size, None,
              None, trainer)
```

## Exercises

1. Try adding a few more hidden layers to see how the result changes.
1. Try out different activation functions. Which ones work best?
1. Try out different initializations of the weights.

## Scan the QR Code to [Discuss](https://discuss.mxnet.io/t/2340)

![](../img/qr_mlp-gluon.svg)

Commit message:

[numpy] Change chapters 2, 3, 4 to use numpy (#323)
* Fix chapter 2

* More changes

* Add softmax-regression-scratch

* Address cr comments

* Fix softmax regression gluon

* Remove as_np_ndarray in notebook

* Fix mlp using numpy

* Fix model selection, underfitting, overfitting

* Fix weight decay

* Fix dropout

* Fix numerical stability and kaggle house price

* Change pip wheel and config.ini

* Update config.ini

* Update Jenkinsfile

* Update Jenkinsfile

* Update Jenkinsfile

chapter_multilayer-perceptrons/mlp-gluon.md, after:

# Concise Implementation of Multilayer Perceptron
:label:`chapter_mlp_gluon`

Now that we learned how multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) work in theory, let's implement them. We begin, as always, by importing modules.

```{.python .input}
import sys
sys.path.insert(0, '..')

import d2l
from mxnet import gluon, init, npx
from mxnet.gluon import loss as gloss, nn
```

## The Model

The only difference from our softmax regression implementation
is that we add two `Dense` (fully-connected) layers instead of one.
The first is our hidden layer, which has *256* hidden units
and uses the ReLU activation function.

```{.python .input  n=5}
npx.set_np()  # set the current notebook to use NumPy semantics, i.e. NumPy-like shapes and arrays

net = nn.Sequential()
net.add(nn.Dense(256, activation='relu'))
net.add(nn.Dense(10))
net.initialize(init.Normal(sigma=0.01))
```

Note that as above we can invoke `net.add()` multiple times in succession,
but we can also invoke it a single time, passing in
multiple layers to be added the network.
Thus, we could have equivalently written
`net.add(nn.Dense(256, activation='relu'), nn.Dense(10))`.
Again, note that as always, Gluon automatically
infers the missing input dimensions to each layer.

Training the model follows the exact same steps as in our softmax regression implementation.

```{.python .input  n=6}
batch_size = 256
train_iter, test_iter = d2l.load_data_fashion_mnist(batch_size)

loss = gloss.SoftmaxCrossEntropyLoss()
trainer = gluon.Trainer(net.collect_params(), 'sgd', {'learning_rate': 0.5})
num_epochs = 10
d2l.train_ch3(net, train_iter, test_iter, loss, num_epochs, batch_size, None,
              None, trainer)
```

## Exercises

1. Try adding a few more hidden layers to see how the result changes.
1. Try out different activation functions. Which ones work best?
1. Try out different initializations of the weights.

## Scan the QR Code to [Discuss](https://discuss.mxnet.io/t/2340)

![](../img/qr_mlp-gluon.svg)
