# Preface

In the summer of 2004 when I graduated from high school, I paid a visit the ACM-ICPC (ACM International College Student Programming Competition) team at Shanghai Jiaotong University, where I was about to enroll. As I only had a month of programming experience, I happened to qualify for the pre-selection competition. The team leader, Mr. Yu Yong gave me a book, "Introduction to Algorithms" before I left and asked me to read it. After school started, he asked me how the book was. I was proud to answer that I felt that it was quite easy as I finished reading it in less than a month. In fact, this was not all empty boasting, as I already participated in a math contest in high school. After I got used to handling rather difficult math problems, I felt like I could understand the algorithm questions that were based on a simpler logic.  Mr. Yu was very surprised, "Well, I suppose you can participate in one of the team's internal competitions."

Actually, understanding an algorithm is only the first step. It is difficult to implement it correctly in a short period of time without a lot of practice. This is very different from mathematics. Because the main difficulty of mathematics lies in solving problems, it is much easier to write down solutions. Therefore, for a long time, I came dead last in the internal team competitions. Although I understood the algorithms, I always failed to resolve code exceptions.

In the summer of 2006, I entered Mr. Lu Baoliang's laboratory. Our research was focused on identifying thought signals from human brain waves through machine learning. I started by studying "Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning" and "Statistical Learning Foundation" on my own. I was deeply fascinated by these two books, and for a long time, I obsessively deduced the formulas in the book over and over again. Later, I was fascinated by various papers on the topic. When I was set to complete my undergraduate education in 2008, I felt that I had a sufficient theoretical grounding in the subject and I started conducting my own experiments and writing research papers. It was a pity that even though I had many ideas and theories, I could not get the desired model accuracy until two years later, when I got it right and finally learned how to do the experiments.

I learned something important from these experiences: computer science is a hands-on subject, and it is difficult to achieve good results without hands-on experience. If an algorithm's capabilities corresponds to the memory size of a machine, hands-on ability is like the working clock speed of the machine's CPU. Memory determines the complexity of the program that can be run, and the CPU determines how fast you can complete it. Of course, these are both essential elements in any experiment.

After learning this lesson, my Ph.D. studies seemed to go smoother. In order to study machine learning algorithms that can effectively process large numbers of training examples, I chose distributed systems as one of the focuses of my doctoral research. In order to better understand deep learning, I participated in the development of the Apache MXNet project. A lot of practice not only guaranteed a stable output, but also inspired many new ideas.

After I graduated from my Ph.D. program, I joined the Amazon cloud computing department so that I could make it easier for others to use deep learning. At work, I met many young students and engineers, who were all eager to learn about deep learning and wanted to apply it to their work and research. They often asked me how they should study deep learning. I found that the textbooks I was familiar with were either too academic (for example, focusing on mathematical descriptions of algorithm) or too practical (for example, discussing the use of deep learning frameworks). To my mind, the ideal textbook should strike the perfect balance between algorithms and practice.

One night in September 2017, it suddenly occurred to me that I should write an introduction to the subject myself, so that others could benefit from the many wrong turns and detours I had taken in my own journey. I wanted to create a Jupyter notepad for each algorithm, first describing it mathematically, then providing its implementation, and finally giving examples of its use on real data. This book was written to give everyone what they need for both an understanding of algorithms and hands-on practice.

At the beginning, I modified the tutorial that Zack wrote for Apache MXNet, translated it into Chinese, and then taught everyone about it every Saturday during live broadcasts by Jiangmen Venture Capital. Soon, I was running out of content from Zack and had to write new parts myself. Fortunately, Aston joined the project and took over most of the work. This weekly online lecture lasted for five months, during which time nearly 3,000 students participated in the discussions and contributed nearly 5,000 valuable discussion topics. In particular, several of the exercises in the actual competition were very popular.

The popularity of this course far exceeded our expectations. We guessed that more people might also be interested in this tutorial that combines algorithms and practice. So, over the next seven months, we rewrote each section to improve its accuracy and readability. From the beginning of this project, we made all the materials available online, allowing everyone to download and distribute them freely. But we also think that by publishing the material as a physical book, it may reach more people. At least, I personally prefer real books. To this end we requested that People's Posts and Telecommunications Press publish our work in book form. Our original intention was to make it easier for more people to use deep learning, so in order to make it easy for everyone to access these resources, we maintained a free version online and reduced the price of the book by not charging a publishing fee.

We have to admit that the integration of algorithms, formulas, pictures, codes, and examples into a book that can actually be read and a series of interactive notebooks, was a major challenge. Please forgive the inevitable shortcomings of this book, which are surely abundant. I hope that you will report any problems to us using the QR code at the end of each section.

Finally, let me end with an inspiring poem by Lu You:

> “What is learned from books is, after all, superficial until tested in practice.”

Li Mu (September 2018)



